# Dale

[Previous](./1-2-setup.md) | [Next](./1-4-variables.md)

## 1.3 Types

### Primitive types

#### Integrals

`int` is the principal integral type. It has the same size as the
`int` provided by the C compiler used to build Dale, so as to
facilitate interoperability with the system's C libraries. `uint` is
the corresponding unsigned integral type.

The explicitly-sized signed and unsigned integral types are as
follows:

  * `int8`/`uint8`
  * `int16`/`uint16`
  * `int32`/`uint32`
  * `int64`/`uint64`

Integral literals can be plain numbers (e.g. `123`) or hexadecimal
literals (e.g. `0xFF`). Negative numbers are prefixed with `-`.

#### Floating-point types

  * `float`
  * `double`
  * `long-double`

Floating-point literals must contain a decimal point (e.g. 1.0). As
per integral literals, negative numbers are prefixed with `-`.

#### Other types

The following types operate in the same way as the corresponding C
type:

  * `bool` (`bool`)
  * `char` (`char`)
  * `void` (`void`)
  * `size` (`size_t`)
  * `ptrdiff` (`ptrdiff_t`)
  * `intptr` (`uintptr_t`)

The `bool` literals are `true` and `false`.

`char` literals comprise a hash character, a backslash and the actual
character. The literal for the letter `e`, for example, is `#\e`. The
specially-handled character literals are `#\SPACE`, `#\TAB`,
`#\NEWLINE`, `#\CARRIAGE`, `#\NULL` and `#\EOF`.

### Pointers

The syntax for pointer types is `(p {type})`.

### Const

The syntax for const types is `(const {type})`. Const semantics are
the same as in C.

### Arrays

The type of an array of values is `(array-of {n} {type})`, where `{n}`
is a literal unsigned integer. A zero-sized array may be declared when
the array is populated during declaration: see
[Variables](./1-4-variables.md).

### Structures

A structure is declared like so:

        (def {name}
          (struct {linkage} [({member1} {member2} ... {memberN})]))

where `{linkage}` is one of `intern`, `extern` and `opaque`, and each
`{member}` contains a field name and type. A simple `pair` structure
would look like so:

        (def int-pair
          (struct intern ((first int) (second int))))

`{linkage}` controls the visibility of a struct defined within a
module. `extern` structs are exportable and usable outside the
module, while `intern` structs are not. `opaque` structs are those
whose members are defined elsewhere:

        (def some-other-struct
          (struct opaque))

Struct literals may be used wherever a reference to a struct may be
used. They take the following form:

        ({name} ({value1} {value2} ... {valueN}))

where each `{value}` is a name-value pair, corresponding to a struct
member. In situations where the value will be cast implicitly, e.g. in
an explicitly-typed variable declaration, it is not necessary to
include the enclosing ({name} ...) form.

### Enumerations

Enumerations ('enums') are declared like so:

        (def {name}
          (enum {linkage} {type} ({member1} {member2} ... {memberN})))

where `{linkage}` is one of `intern` and `extern`, and `{type}` is the
underlying integral type for the enum.

Each `{member}` is either a name atom, or a name-value pair. By
default, enum member values begin from zero. If a member does not have
an explicitly-defined value (i.e. it is a name atom), it takes the
value of the previous member, plus one. For example:

        (def my-enum
          (enum extern int (a b c (d 1) e (f 0) (g -1) h i j k)))

The member-value assignments for this enum are as follows:

        a: 0; b:  1; c: 2; d: 1; e: 2; f: 0;
        g: -1; h: 0; i: 1; j: 2; k: 3

Enum literals may be used wherever a reference to an enum may be used.
They take the form `({name} {member-name})`:

        (def enum-fn
          (fn extern void ((n my-enum))
            (printf "%d\n" n)
            (return)))

        (enum-fn (my-enum a))
        (enum-fn (my-enum b))

Similarly to structs, the `{member-name}` alone can be used where the
value will be cast implicitly.

Enums are strongly-typed. The type name for an enum is `{name}`. When
an enum is defined, a series of related functions are defined at the
same time: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `=`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`,
`<<`, `>>`, `&`, `|` and `^`. These functions are in turn defined only
over that enum's type, so a function like `+`, for example, takes two
instances of the enum as its arguments and returns a new enum value as
its result. The exceptions to this are `<<` and `>>` (left and
right-shift), which take `int`s as their second arguments. Note that
enums can be cast to and from their underlying types, too.

### Other types

Function pointers, anonymous functions and function structs are
described in the [Functions](./1-5-functions.md) section.

[Previous](./1-2-setup.md) | [Next](./1-4-variables.md)
